[Music]
[Applause]
a few months ago someone gave me the
book never split the difference and
started reading it and immediately
immediately said wow and so today we're
we're very fortunate to have with us
Chris Voss Chris come on down I put this
quote up here from the book a successful
negotiation negotiator has to get
everything they asked for without giving
anything back of substance and do so in
a way that leaves your counterpart
feeling as if they have a great
relationship now who would like to
acquire that skill let me ask the
question again in a different way who
would like to acquire that skill
on that note Chris there they're all
yours thank you
is very cool to be here today uh it's
kind of little exercise all right I want
everybody stand up please
I once you get a nice solid stand feet
about shoulder-width apart
you don't feel very grounded make a fist
arms at 90 degree angles
put your right thumb up put your left
forefinger out now switch switch back
switch again subscribe be the fact all
right thank you very much I so what was
the point of that did you need to be
Albert Einstein to understand what I was
asking you to do was it complicated the
Nobel Prize if there's some
technological breakthrough there but was
it easy now it was a new barrier to
learning a barrier to change is
awkwardness it was awkward
the hospice ago she ation skills that
work some of them actually kind of like
Jedi Mind Tricks
then I complicated but the first couple
times you doing they're going to feel
all there's some interesting brain
science now the backpack says stuff up
now sometimes I will when I'm training
somebody I'll stop and I'll say say
these exact four words saying because
and they'll resist but I'll and
sometimes I'll say writing down what
happens on a new skill every time that
you say it and I also finish the
sentence it actually creates a new
neural pathway in a brain and the first
time you're doing it the first time
you're doing this you are actually in a
process of creating a new neural pathway
in your brains you in practice it in a
little while and there's actually a
finite amount of practice every single
time you go down that neural pathway
goes faster the next time faster faster
faster faster motional intelligence
hostage negotiation motional
intelligence on steroids such that we we
found out worked and hostage
go she Asian we found out of work 4050
years ago now our brain sciences hair
back backed it up tells us that you know
I used to class I used to teach I used
to say do this because I said I've been
doing it for a long time I said just do
it now the brain science backs it up a
couple things that I heard beforehand
that I really liked
Pete strategy guy said you're in a trust
business what business was eyeing it
yeah I was in a trust business so when I
first want to become a hostage
negotiator I'm a former SWAT guy
recovering SWAT guy and I had no
background I went to the woman that was
in charge of the Hospital Association
team FBI New York City Amy Pond and I
say with the most reverence tough New
York chick you know my kind of girl and
and by the way I grew up in Iowa I know
the action doesn't sound like it but I
did
it's a long story kidnapped by gypsies
ola so go to Amy and I've been on the
SWAT team of Berlin SWAT team in
Pittsburgh and I've tried out for the
FBI's version of the Navy SEALs which is
a hostage rescue team reinjure mining
and knew that every swatter has got a
shelf life like a professional athlete
you keep doing until you get hurt too
many times and you can't do it anymore I
thought well let's not blow the knee out
completely let me do something in crisis
response so I knew we had hostage
negotiators and I thought how hard could
that be I talk to people all the time
I can talk to terrorists yeah and that's
a bit of background I grew up in a small
town Iowa Midwestern blue-collar
background sort of Richard George Ross
and my son I like a kid kid that the
boss unofficial Paul's family motto is
how hard could it be
which is not quite the redneck saying
like hey watch it it
we usually don't die but that I said how
are could it be so I went to Amy and she
was both assigned to the Terrorism
branching I kind of walked up to and I'm
with tada
but dinner classes and rings hmm okay
whatever your hostage negotiator huh
yeah she's you get any training nope
okay any psychology degrees nope hey you
can't before right yeah we're your
hostage negotiator please department
nope did you use go away and I'm sure I
didn't stay at my feet go but come on
but I know that's how I felt I was like
what do you mean go away I want to do
this she said I don't care everybody
wants to do it everybody wants to be a
hospicio sure you and everybody else go
away
I said no seriously it's got to be
something I could do
she said there is go volunteer to
suicide hotline now go away until you've
done that
and I wouldn't volunteer and five months
later I came back and I said hey as long
as you know I've been on holiday for
about five months and she's like you're
kidding
I don't know which one helpline that's
why I volunteered yeah you know Jim you
know these people happen to be a suicide
hotline that was attributed to being
founded by norman vincent peale the
power positive thinking who was really
founded by his wife roost at repeal it
was her idea and she had no problem get
her husband to do stuff
[Music]
she was a classic you know behind every
successful man is a powerful woman and
they were a great combination with
Stepford filled normative in Seville and
just you know what probably one of the
original Power couples ever and but I
volunteered there and and I couldn't
believe that she couldn't believe that I
went there and it's a little bit of what
you know what you're getting what you
getting today ask the people who know
how to do it ask them what to do and
then do it sounds really stupid and
unfortunately it's just I went back when
I wrote the book and went back to Amy
because her name wasn't out there
publicly and FBI pre-publication review
says you got to go to certain people and
get their permission to put their name
of the book otherwise leaves our name
huh I said not leaving Amy's name out
she brought me in because after I
volunteered on the hotline there were
literally five people in line in front
of me she jumped me past everybody she
said when I went to her said I want to
put your name of the book I said you
said you know I must have told a
thousand people to do that - um dad you
were one of them simple simple stuff
real real simple stuff so what we do
that's different than what you're doing
by the way if you walk in a men's room
you catch me doing this
you know why I'm not signaling anybody
in there I kind of practice before I go
and stay though it screw it up
so we got this great video that we run
all the time where it's a simulation of
a bunch of FBI you just get ready to for
this boring training and there are new
people in your office and one of the new
guys is a SWAT guy he gets introduced to
another guy in the office was sitting
waiting for the boring speaker and then
guy gets introduced as a hostage
negotiator and suaq outlet says the
hostage negotiation yeah really
so what do you say if some guys got a
gun and he says I need to call in 60
seconds so she died what do you say if I
were to ask some of you to roleplay with
me right now that was a bank robber and
I asked you to be a hostage negotiator
and I said you can't here's what you
can't do you're doing you talk about
anything you want can't give me
transportation you can't give me weapons
you can't give me drugs or alcohol you
can't exchange hostages I looked at you
when I said you're the hostage
negotiator my hostage taker yeah it all
look at him I need a con 60 seconds if
she dies what do you say
can i phone a friend right and we do
that exercise and interact with people
and I show people how to turn the 60
seconds into any time all the time that
you need
I run a video a thousand times and were
certain things that stuck out in front
of me that I before I ever really saw
her and it was a thing that sold my book
to the publisher and since and it had to
do with the question that my one of my
that the guy who wrote my proposal
stumped me on because not once does the
hospice negotiator try to get the other
person to say yes not once and the title
of the chapter it's a slightly different
title now but what really went into the
publisher was yes is the last thing you
want here and when we were talking about
this concept was with my co-writer at
the time their book ends up the guy
wrote the book is a guy named Tyler oz
Tahl Raz write anything about business
read anything about business he's
written he's the world champion business
book writer he also is co-writer of a
book called never eat alone 2005 Kiefer
oscillated probably people in the room
here to know keith is keith lives here
in town greatest networking book ever
written
paul was a co-writer in that book and I
used to carry that book around the
people I was going to work with and say
write it like this fine I got the guy
that wrote it like that
but the guy performed that did the
proposal he said when you were hostage
negotiator I had to get people to say
yes that was the only question ever
asked me that it was thoroughly stumped
at because I said now we don't it's a
useless word it does me no good and what
I'm here to talk to you about today is
your addiction - yes I am a realtor I
haven't said yes in 28 days without one
of those kind of meetings right you're
addicted yet sorry and that's the
biggest thing that you have trouble
getting out of and here's how this
happens for a couple of reasons
this is nonsense out there called it's
one of the phrases for getting somebody
to say yes a whole bunch of times I
wrote a get to what you want there's an
academic term for it's called mere
agreement and there's a study out there
that says that mirror agreement works so
anytime somebody refers to an academic
study don't just stop it saying there's
an academic study take a look at the
study then the study is if it says if
you get people to say yes the little
yeses it's more likely they'll say yes
to the big yes now I'm not here telling
you that you'll never make a deal doing
that I'm just here telling you that's a
horrible batting average and the study
is taking place among students in an
academic environment that are in
roleplay situations and they're trying
to make deals and I teach at USC and I
teach you Georgetown and I know the
shortcomings of those deals so that's
why I make them my students do the
majority of their negotiations outside
in the real world I let them do some
inside but I say you got to test-drive
this stuff in a real world so I know the
shortcomings of simulated negotiations
and their shortcomings are huge and
that's one of the things that mere
agreement is based on but you can you
can google it and they call it momentum
selling they call it guessable
propositions
they call it the yes momentum and you
can find no shortage of stuff out there
that will tell you that it's really it's
good yeah and it called the yeses tie
downs now seriously somebody's trying to
tie you down and you like that we need
to bother with it as hostage negotiators
example how do you feel when the phone
rings and you pick up the phone and they
say have you got a few minutes to talk
you automatically go yeah thank God you
called
and then if they say would you like to
make more money
oh my god yes thank God you call no
here's the problem have you got a few
minutes to talk first of all is for
questions number one I have a few
minutes I want to talk to you I have two
minutes I want to talk to you do I want
to talk about what you want to talk
about you know there's a man alive or
woman probably who isn't going to call
from their significant other and a voice
on the phone the most important person
on the entire planet and a voice says
can we talk and the man says to himself
well I like talking to you but somehow I
know I don't want to talk about what you
want to talk
then after that is how long is a few
minutes my next year your sister she
calls me on the phone says we got a few
minutes to talk she calls when she's got
an hour drive in front of her and it's
going to be she talks in I listen which
is also called for have you got a few
minutes to talk shut up while I speak
and the last one is how do I get off the
phone
now we have been hammered with this yes
thing so much that if it ever worked
we're now like battered children nobody
tries to get you to say yes to anything
unless they're taking you someplace
we're in Los Angeles right what if we
are nobody tries to get you even if
you're trying to confirm there's three
kinds of yeses commitment confirmation
and counterfeit and so many people try
to lead us into the commitment yes by
the confirmation yes that people get
really good at the counterfeit yes well
my students at USC is trying to set up
his honeymoon he's going to a luxury
resort he's going in the offseason he
knows that you offseason he knows what
they do the luxury resort is they offer
discount on the regular rooms but they
don't offer discounts on a bungalows and
a bungalows are largely empty and he
wants to negotiate a deal with the
manager of the resort he wants a deal on
a bungalow which he knows they're not
offering and he also knows that they're
empty because it's your offseason so all
he wants to do is confirm a innocent
fact it's the offseason right that's
like what month it is what day it is
what planet one the manager knows it's
going someplace nobody ever tries to get
you to say yes unless it's going
someplace our guard goes up incidentally
and we're so battered by this we're all
so battered by this
like I'm on a plane a few months ago
between LA and New York and I'm a very
strategic flier so I have taken the time
to make sure that I have a middle seat
in economy since landing right the
five-hour flight so I get to get up fine
I use a restroom nicely sitting next to
me I'm sorry can I get up I get up I go
in the back and when I come out I see
she's still standing in the aisle and
I'm like awesome so five-hour flight she
doesn't want to sit down right away and
you got to get up and move around but I
want to be rude I want to make sure this
is okay to her with her and so I walk up
to a knife and guessing you want to sit
down right away she looks at me and she
looks pounds huge to me success good I
want to read my book and she's worried
about whatever what's it gonna mean if
she says yes what does she let herself
in for there's a they used to be parking
lot Washington DC when I lived in DC
it's the stupidest thing was they'd
finally took it down because a
renovation of the waterfront so this
parking lot had a machine $8 cash to get
in didn't take credit cards exact change
only and no time limit what does that
mean
I once parked my motorcycle after four
months three dollars
so the locals that lived around there
who worked in the area knew about this
and so they're you know they always
always go on parking there because it
was $8.00 all day and inevitably there'd
be somebody that wasn't familiar with it
their sign sign sign cash only $8 exact
change cash home and there'd be somebody
right up there trying to put a credit
card in the machine that 60 years old
and I jump out I walk up the nice lady's
in and send a car and what help her out
I look at it I saying do you have a
dollars cash and she goes what if I do
I mean to convince yourself of this
finally last or not this weekend
tomorrow good Eve ever mom goody
favorite store probably Nordstrom's
right I don't know what it is but
staying right outside and stop people
just as they go anything like shopping
at Nordstrom's I bet they don't go in I
bet if they go and they look over the
shoulders so much that they leave
without buying anything I bet if you do
that for half an hour security comes out
and ask you to leave like you you'll be
stunned I mean just just look for it
look for it in different little places
is such an addiction and it becomes an
addiction because yes it's been
designated as the most beautiful word in
the English language it's not any
language we love to hear oh god it feels
so good over here and there's an
interesting story that John Lennon first
began to fall in love with Yoko Ono
because he went to an art exhibit that
she put together and she climbed over
and was in there like an obstacle course
and you crawled around on this stuff and
then finally you came to this ladder you
crawl up this ladder and you looked at
telescope or four walls in tiny little
letters was a word yeah
and we love to hear so much we forget in
an instant in a very instant when you're
trying to get somebody to say yes if I
try to get you to say yes you'll back up
so we didn't even bother with this and
it was never even a topic of
conversation in hostage negotiation
never but because yet for one of my
rules is yes is nothing without how and
we were in a trust business
the first major seeds that I ever got
involved in negotiated bank robbery of
hostages in Brooklyn 6,000 years ago and
interestingly enough even though they
happen in the movies all the time a bank
robbery where they actually negotiate
hostages out happens in the entire
country about once every 20 years
they're rare events when we were when we
did the one in New York the last one
before that was 20 years earlier and it
was Dog Day Afternoon moving without
Pacino and that's New York how often
they happen in New York was the last
time you heard of a bank robbery with
hostages in Los Angeles and like robbing
banks in his towns so it just doesn't
happen it was a second negotiator on the
phone I started in with hostage
negotiation techniques the first guy was
a highly manipulative type I had learned
how to deal with highly manipulative
types on the telephone on the hotline
when I when I finally got trained as a
negotiator from my time at the hotline I
said I've been doing this for a year I
just didn't have a SWAT team outside but
he was actually extremely manipulative
businessman it was it was a business
transaction he wasn't really sure how to
deal with me so he actually answer phone
off to another guy a minute and a half
in the other guy who doesn't realize I'm
not the first negotiator first guy up
was a guy named Joe they handed off to
me with some specific instructions
I got on the phone and start do my my
suicide hotline think my late-night FM
DJ voice and a minute a half in before
he knew my name the guys literally says
to me on the phone I trust you Joe
before he even knew my name he trusted
me an interesting sequence they sum up
there's a whole nother set of
psychological impact things around names
I would tell you that it would teach you
to use names differently than your
username now talking to a realtor just a
couple of weeks ago one day training we
had here in town he says we sit down you
know I'm having trouble get these phone
calls returned I'm having trouble
getting phone calls returns we do all
the research we get to know everything
we can about our potential clients we
get to know everything we can about
these people and having trouble getting
phone calls return return any I said say
that again did having trouble getting
phone calls return he looked at me like
what are you stupid I was pretty much
straight English right I said no what
would you say before that how what are
you doing so we get to know everything
we can about so that's your problem what
I know about you another day I said
there is easy for them not to return
your calls they got no idea who you are
you're just some schmuck leaving
messages for their voicemail your whole
desire to get to know them you didn't do
it in a way where it was a two-way
street and one of them getting to know
you is even more important and there's a
lot of little sight subtle tiny ways
that you do this that the way we
construct what we say I'll give you two
different stories and they'll feel
completely different when I when I
became an FBI hostage negotiator I went
through the training at Quantico which
is a mystical place
it really is and going through the
training was one of the best friend I
ever went through and while I was there
I began to hear about these guys that
traveled international working
kidnapping and made all over the world
saving people's lives
and I want to heard about these guys and
we and I finally heard that these guys
were on the same team the critical
incident negotiation team by the end of
the week they give a presentation and
what I came out of there I knew and
wanted to be on the same thing I let me
tell you the story different way when
you become an FBI officers and oh
you go to the training at Quantico and
you find yourself at a mystical place
this mystical place at Quantico what
lives are transformed and you begin to
find out about these people traveling
all over the world saving people's lives
on international kidnappings and you
find out that these guys are members of
the sentiment by the end of the training
you know you want to be one of lovers of
the scenting second story of more
personal vendor gauge you are because I
know that each word has a different
emotional impact and it's not that the
word has a bad impact at the context
attend I switched from I to you when
we're teaching people to interact a lot
of people have been taught appropriately
like when they're trying to confirm
something they've heard from the other
side they say what I'm hearing is well
that's a misuse of the word I instead if
I say you sound like I've immediately
plugged the word you in instead of I and
I began to engage them in a very
different way there's a lot of little
things that I was taught how to do that
as a hostage negotiator then when I
started to teach and begin to see it in
other ways and learn things in other
areas begin to understand the difference
of the impact of those words every
question has an impact every time you
try to get somebody to say yes you
create anxiety
that person every time so on you got to
get out of that I'll give you one with
this is going to sound stupid and we
haven't quite got the brain science to
back it up all now but the dumbest thing
the simplest thing if you get exactly
what you want by getting somebody to say
no when you when you guys get home when
you get back to your office when you get
out of here write down the questions
that you normally like to ask people the
majority of will be yes questions your
first step is breaking your addiction be
simply to switch it to the other side
give you an example by two years ago
Jack wants to come through Los Angeles
in his wife Suzie their recent book the
real life MBA they're doing a book
signing i'ma girl in the book side I
want to ask Jack wells to come and speak
to my class at USC I've had some really
interesting people come in and speak so
how many people try to get Jack Woltz to
say something say yes or something in
that book signing how many people are
250 300 people hey Jack come to my kids
birthday party hey well come over the
house for dinner
everybody has speak school so the two
problems here book signing a bunch of
people for authors Popular's Jack Welch
long line they're running it through
like an assembly line right before you
get there they give you a little coupon
write your name on it that way Jack says
hey nice to see you Chris good luck next
they got a logistical problem problem
one what's problem - Jack what's
legitimate celebrity they don't know who
I am
there's no background investigation
there's no metal detector they don't
know I'm not a disgruntled former
shareholder GE they lost my life savings
when I showed a G stock and Jack Woltz
took it up right Jane Fonda a few years
ago she's at a book signing falling over
vietnam vet comes up there it's right
there face a legitimate Rockstar
celebrity I'm going to be within arm's
length of this person
he has security action is always quicker
than reaction I'm gonna get close enough
to him I could do anything I want they
can't stop me if you come up I could
kiss him on the lips they don't know
what I'm going to do it right not that I
would kiss Jack what's up so how much
time do I got with Jack Walsh probably
fine
I walk up to Jack Walsh and I say is it
a ridiculous idea you to come and speak
to the class I teach at USC in a
Marshall School of Business look
something to the left it's this really
intense look on his face and I think to
myself just kill Jack Walsh he's so
angry at his stroke he's gonna fall
right over secure you can tackle me
there you drag me out and head cook and
then when he doesn't unfreeze it and I
see I'm relieved that he hasn't died but
I then I'm thinking in my head he can't
go scared Easter day said he looks at me
he says my personal assistant tonight
this is special Twitter account we have
setup to communicate with her I will
call her and let her know that you gotta
be reaching out for I think we're going
to be in Los Angeles in a fall if we are
we'll come in and we'll speak at your
class how does an ad
because I two things I did something
nobody else is doing number one number
two I know the psychology psychological
I don't know the psychology I know the
psychological reactions to different
things I know the way the brain
functions I know the different portions
of the brain I know that we're three
times is more like or six times more
likely to make a deal with somebody we
like I know how to be likeable without
being vulnerable to needing to be liked
I know how the brain works a negative
positive emotions I know how those
influence your thought patterns I know
how to turn negative sound I know how to
turn positive up as a hostage negotiator
I listen learn to listen to the
different components and everything
everybody says and there are only about
five there's not that many and I know
how I can turn each one up and down at
will and I know the rules in the way the
in the universe of the brain under the
emotional rules and there's some always
rules and I know certain things that I
can say will always have the same impact
and how much of an impact will that be
give you in just an example on switching
from yes to none one of my students at
Georgetown does an experiment because he
is on a Republican fundraising committee
a couple elections back not the most
recent one and they're dialing for
dollars at night what are they doing
it's cold calling and what's the cold
calling system call them on the phone
and get three yeses in a row get your
three yeses in a row you've built the
yes momentum you milk built mayor
agreement you tied them down then you
ask him to kill a question which is a
trap which they know is coming and ask
for money that's every cold calling
script on a planet is designed to do
that yes yes yes oh they take their
three asked questions and he makes them
three no questions
takes the first question instead of
would you like to see the Republicans
back in
White House in November it changes have
you given up on seeing the Republicans
take the White House in November changes
the three s questions to no questions
they run the two scripts side-by-side
the no script gets a twenty three
percent higher rate of return only that
change change nothing else you're going
to get at least twenty three percent
more effectiveness effectiveness what
would that do over the coming you if
your batting average raised by twenty
three percent and how much you've got to
raise your batting average I don't know
how many baseball fans are on the room
any baseball fans
what's the Mendoza line who wondered so
for those of you that are not baseball
fans the Mendoza actual bad for this guy
I'm not sure what his first name I
should know his first name he was a he
was a guy that was in and out of the
majors was a phenomenal fielder but
wasn't a great hitter and always hit
around 200 215 and he kept washing out
of the majors and he couldn't stand and
actually my understanding George Brett a
guy from the Kansas City Royals joking
about it one day said the mo you know
I'm trying to stay above the Mendoza
line in an interview that just caught so
200 a batting average for Major League
Baseball to about 200 215 where you wash
out of the lead what your batting
average got to be to be in the all-star
game at 300 right you hit 300 how much
money you make it a day right these are
the guys that are signed in 150 million
dollar contracts at 300 and above how
many hits a month do you have to go to
get to go from the Mendoza line to a
hundred million dollar contract about
nine nine or ten exactly right a month
day after day after day
getting up and going to bat day after
day of the day an incremental change
takes people from washing out of the
league signing hundred million dollar
contracts changing from yes to no and
getting redoing your wiring getting a
gut instinct on that one alone probably
raise your batting average 23 percent
there's a bunch of other stuff that I
learned from hostage negotiation that's
in the book share with you in many ways
as we can see it's going to talk about
how we're going to do that but that's
just one in and back to it in case
you're wondering none of its complicated
just take some rewiring and some
practice if nothing else if you haven't
got the book just read the reviews on
Amazon what they say the thing that I
loved about it more than anything else
is like wow this really counterintuitive
stuff that was really easy to do and no
shortage of people or making differences
in their negotiations before they finish
the first chapter I wanted it to be
usable that's why I brought haul in
because he could write a digestible
understandable book he would put
structure to it so that because I you
know I got I'm I'm the original short
attention span theater guy so I'll get
about halfway through a chapter and I'll
have to stop because my lips are tired
but um boom but sometimes especially
when you're reading to learn your brain
only has so much capacity in a given day
and if you have a chapter that's 50 50
pages long and you can't stop ten pages
in you might not even pick the book up
you can you can pull this stuff in in
small doses when we finish the bank
robber in Brooklyn we didn't do face to
face surrenders
so Bobby the first hostage taker to come
out thought he was surrendering to me
personally I finally got the last bit to
get him to come out when I said I'll
meet you outside and he said yeah I want
to end this we had to have him walk into
the arms of the SWAT guys because the
SWAT guys had the perimeter and they
have security control and as soon as the
SWAT guys got their hands on him he
looked up and he said where's Chris
after he'd surrendered kidnapping and I
talked about in the Philippines where we
got a hostage walked away and we we
thoroughly in the negotiation defeated
the other side and they became
disheartened there was originally a 10
million dollar ransom demand we had one
conversation in the middle of that
negotiation which my Director of
Operations is also my son refers to as
the birth of that's right moment and we
went from ten million dollars to zero in
one conversation and we got it that's
right not a you're right
but that's right when that was all over
and since our hostages walked away the
terrorists and then were bad-to-the-bone
head-chopping straight out of the movies
bad guys they got nothing I'm back in
the Philippines about three weeks later
and I'm back with the negotiator that I
was coaching and he said you're not
going to believe who called me on a
phone sound like I who our bad guys name
was survived he said somebody called me
really Subbaiah still had my guys phone
number his undercover phone number his
undercover name didn't know who he was
though he had to be with police or the
military kid knows real name
Tobiah calls my guy on a phone
three weeks after he'd been completely
defeated and got nothing and said you've
been promoted yet
I don't know what you said to me on the
phone but whatever was it worked they
should promote you hangs up I'm going to
Robert De Niro Billy Crystal movie
analyzes anyone says you you've got to
give you you're good but that's the way
to leave people in your interactions
hostage negotiators that that was our
currency we never know when we were
going to have to face somebody again and
if they live that meant my eye or one of
my colleagues would see them again
so we believed in long-term
relationships and reputation and getting
everything you want in a negotiation and
have and if the other guy's got nothing
but if you didn't get what he was really
after all our conceit was we still
wanted to have a great relationship with
them no matter what so that we could
cross paths with them under any
circumstances whether it would be the
next day or in ten years and they would
remember us and be happy to talk to us
again and that's the way we raise the
level of our game that's how we continue
to save people's lives as hostage
negotiators then have a reputation of
being people you can put your life in
their hands and you can trust them if
they're in a trust game if you're in a
trust business you could trust the
hostage negotiator so access stuff that
I teach and it's kind of cool
you know it's kind of cool the
accumulation of relationships and people
who want to continue to do business with
you and feel connected to you separate
from how the transaction came up I dig
it I hope you get a chance to work with
you help you do more stuff so let me ask
you a question the book is called never
split the difference right this audience
right here raise your hands everybody
almost every negotiation therein ends
with splitting the difference can you
talk about that you know the why do
people do that so alright so when you
split the difference every time you did
that things were beautiful after that
right now so splitting the difference
never solves any problems we face with
anyway we think they will we think we
think it's a hat to move forward we
think it's a quick short hat the vast
majority of the time splitting the
difference doesn't address any of the
actual problems in the transaction any
of the implementation or coming to an
agreement will follow on problems and we
think we have an agreement when we split
the difference in agreed and now instead
of the problems being over the problems
have just begun and then you've
capitulated on something that had
nothing to do with solving any of your
problems so if you can solve those
problems with the delay that saves time
go a little slower you go much faster in
your transactions and then you've never
had to split the difference because it
didn't solve your problems in any way so
if it's not going to solve your problems
why do it it solves the problem
separately and why do you think they do
that because you think it's going to
work the other issue too is or there's a
fundamental feeling of fairness you're
trying to be fair so you try and
sometimes another aspect of it might be
you might not think you're entitled you
know some of the sell ourselves short
will worried we're worried that maybe
we're not anti
to the full amount or word that maybe we
don't deserve the full amount maybe
we're being greedy we're thinking I
trying to make a living too you know
there's there's probably three reasons
why we split the difference on a regular
basis and it just doesn't work we're
looking for a hack didn't solve our
problems we don't think we're worth it
but it doesn't help it doesn't fix
things if it did you guys have been
holding the seminar and we'd be watching
you it's just and you know my great
example is splitting the difference is
like you know what should I wear with
this suit today sure wear black shoes or
should I wear brown shoes so I'll wear
one black and one brown in the book the
big part of the book is empathetic with
tactical empathy correct right what is
tactical empathy alright first of all
it's not sympathy empathy is not
sympathy empathy is not I feel bad for
you I know how you feel like stop saying
that please empathy is understanding the
other side if you truly understand
empathy you're interestingly enough you
look out and see how powerful it is
there's some articles out there now
called the dark side of emotional
intelligence it's ridiculously insanely
powerful true empathy is you know who's
best at empathy social pass because
empathy is understanding where the other
side is coming from only so what we take
from that and why we coin the term
tactical empathy we know so much more
about it I know how the brain functions
I know I know
I know you have three negative thinking
buttons in your brain and you have one
positive thinking button in your brain
the negative thinking button in your
brain is no less than three times the
size of the positive like a good so I
know tactically how to address that
and I know the reasons you won't make a
deal or three times more important than
the reasons why you will so since I'm
lazy I'm going to get rid of the reasons
you won't make a deal first I will make
tactical choices knowing how the
emotions run through the brain so we
take empathy which is just a recognition
of what emotions are going on in the
last 40 years we learned how to dial
different things down and up is it is it
manipulative is respect manipulative is
repeat is appreciation manipulative are
manners manipulative now the issue of
whether or not it's manipulative how
many of you got one of these but wait a
minute they're really bad people that
use these don't don't you feel it's
morally wrong to use a phone because bad
people use a home well it's the same
thing with the negotiation tools so
after the tools I'm done the
manipulation as bad as why you're trying
to manipulate somebody trying to
manipulate somebody into a bad deal then
that's that's immoral trying to keep
somebody on track while you're moving
them to the home of their dreams is a
completely separate issue
Virna so oftentimes there a situation
where they're representing a buyer who
wants to buy a property right and
there's a listing agent on the other
side from your perspective how are you
going to approach that negotiation how
are you going to prepare yourself what
are you going to be thinking about as
you enter into that negotiation and what
the listing agent to see me is a
straight shooter which means I want to
feel like we've got a good working
relationship but that I'm not
necessarily going to get pushed around
I'm going to be we're going to be very
collaborative as long as we're
collaborative things are going to go
wonderful but I know at certain point
sometimes I'm going to have to draw
boundaries I'm going to have to say no
let's say no if I have to say no I let
it out a little at a time I'll say it
very gently and what I want I want to be
able to for people to feel respected and
appreciated and also that I've said no
to them in certain ways I want em to pay
establishes a two-way street I'm going
to exercise empathy because I want to
back from them I want to get us to the
point where we've got to work in a
relationship where we can solve the
actual problems and nobody's afraid of
cooperating and so then because I'm
going to want to communicate through the
agent to the other side and I'm going to
do that a variety of ways some voices
I'm going to say things to the agent
that I want them to say word for word
for the other side but I don't want them
to know that I did dental and those and
I will use something we call the secret
the gay in the upper hand and the
negotiation is given the other side of
the illusion of control I think if I see
something that's going to be your
problem I'm going to say how is that
going to work enough times until the
agent says it to themselves and the
agent finally says it sends it to the
seller and so it's a constant
communication Coloma trading you're
going between everybody and how would
you communicate to someone that you are
straight shooter and you're not going to
be pushed around how would you do that
specifically I'm not going to be afraid
to say negative things to them but I'm
never going to say anything negative
that I haven't given them a little bit
of warning on like a you know a real
counterintuitive if I if I had something
to say to you that I know you're not
going to like I'm going to say you're
not going to like this then I'll say I
I'm going to use his apology
strategically I never apologize at the
end not before after I've said something
they don't like I'll say I'm sorry I
kind of like this and then I will finish
if we get something we like to call the
Oprah rule was the last time you heard
about Oprah having a very public fight
with anybody what front of her 17 year
Booker a friend of mine here in town
same thing we did in hostage negotiation
we controlled the end of every
conversation controlled the end of the
conversation not too beginning
Oprah's rule and her Booker's rule was
they always let made sure when people
left they were happy when they left so
if I have to confront you in our
negotiation on the same I'm sorry it's
going to sound harsh I'm going to tell
you what it is and the last thing I'm
going to say is now I want us to be
successful together that's a specific
sequencing of psychological impact that
I've had on finishing with a statement
that for lack of a better term is
nurturing not apologetic not
disingenuous anywhere I want us to be
successful I want us to make this deal
and when the Oprah rule because the last
impression is a lasting impression
the last impression is a lasting
impression my mother always taught me if
you don't make a good first impression
you might not get camping a second I
never paid attention to the last
depression the last impression is a
lasting impression because I'm going to
need to talk to you on the phone again
the last thing that I say will ring in
your ears the last thing I said
you know I want us to be successful
together that means you pick up the
phone and you listen to me next time I
have to talk and he'll think of me like
you know he didn't let me get hit with
any surprises he saw there was a problem
coming he let you know what the problem
was and I feel like working with him
again that's how you and he'll never
know that because it was because the
last thing I said to him was you know I
want us to be successful together so let
me add a few more variables in the next
I'm representing a buyer you have the
listing agent you have other buyers that
are going to be bidding on the property
also so there's other agents trying to
get the attention of the listing agent
and the listing agent isn't isn't
communicating there they're saying as
little as possible so you're
representing a buyer there are other
buyers bidding on the property and the
listing agent is being non-communicative
what would you how would you navigate in
that situation probably the first thing
I try is it should be not communicated
that means I price in an email it says
have you given up on doing business with
me okay number have you given up on
seeing the Republicans back in the White
House in November have you given up on
one-line email nothing more you'd be
stunned at how quickly you get responses
from that I mean be ready to get a
response as soon as three minutes
probably no more than an hour usually
instantaneously when people see them
because you beast under what people say
no to stop secondly if if you're being
non communicated with me then you
probably don't feel heard you prompt in
our interaction whatever time we were
together I was probably trying to get
you to say yes the whole time which
means I just put myself in a category
everybody else there's a pretty good
chance you don't remember me I worked
really hard to remember yours Steve how
you doing Steve what's going on tonight
Steve you know how to kids Steve has
wife Steve Steve Steve Steve Steve Steve
but the reverse is from Chris I'm Chris
and I'm working on behalf of a couple of
people
it'll bill and Kathy from Iowa bill and
Kathy been trying to come down lay their
entire likelihood this is a place to be
what I'm doing now is I'm personalizing
and becoming mobile instead of me
getting to know you you're getting to
know nice little increments here and
there ever ever every step of the way
you're going to know us as opposed to me
try to get to know you or me hammering
you with yes you want to make a deal
don't you want to make a lot of money
don't you and then also whatever comes
out of your mouth I'm making sure that
you know that I heard you because if you
talk and I don't listen then I just
wasted your tummy so why should you talk
to me I noticed that you are very calm
is that natural is that what you learn
the B you're very patient you're not
trying to rush into anything whereas
most salespeople are trying to get it
done now get it done now get it done now
any thoughts around that I've learned it
you know it's not my natural demeanor
I'm that you're one of three types every
one of you you're one of three types
it's our caveman wiring your
fight/flight make friends a sort of
friend oriented analytical the flight
guy is a very analytical guy my natural
born type is the fight assertive
negotiator Donald Trump and I are the
same type asserted in our buddies one of
those to begin with the rest of us
learned you become the best negotiator
you could possibly be when you
understand which each attributes to the
other types make you better
there's no one best type you begin to
learn the the the friend oriented people
is six times more likely to make a deal
with somebody you like
aciss urges go like a lot of guys smiles
all the time makes more deals than I do
you have to smile so it's learned and
talk about what's the role of patience
in the negotiations patience is a weapon
and just like silence you know there's
the we call them effective forces just
slightly be impatient
first of all patience is an advantage
because it makes you the site feel less
pushed there's a core need for autonomy
one of the fundamental core needs it's
why this country's here because of our
need for autonomy so the more patient
was armed or the other person feels
their autonomy is being respected the
easier it is for them to respond to you
then also I had a judge in a trial New
York he had to get a great phrase he
said like to say we're going to delay
things in order to save time now the
position I was in with the FBI
overseeing hostage negotiation teams
across the United States I would see a
siege in Atlanta and a siege in Portland
and I would see the guys in Atlanta work
that siege and be done in three hours
and the guys of Portland work it and
would take him eight the guys in Atlanta
were real deliberate and they didn't
rush into anything
and they took their time and
talk things out and heard people out the
guys in Portland was commander wants to
know when we're going to get this done
we got to get this guy out
and they were very directed it would
very action-oriented and the you know
let's get the processing gate let's get
this start let's start talking and I can
see the people that were the most direct
and the most engaged take twice as long
as the people that were the most relaxed
you seem to say in the book that
negotiations are more about emotion than
logic and reason right how do you see
that applying in a real estate
negotiation alright so we make decisions
based on what we care about which makes
decision making by definition and
emotional process reason is what we
think up after we our gut has told us
what we want to do so if you're willing
to accept that then you begin to
understand what are some of the one of
the principle components of what makes
up emotional decision-making that the
negatives are three times as powerful as
the positives and then the last thing we
add in is a hostage negotiator we always
look for what the recent loss was and as
it turns out the dominating theory of
how the biggest not the only factor but
the biggest factor is people's fear of
loss and they want Danny Kahneman who
wrote the book Thinking Fast and Slow
won a Nobel Prize for that so if I
understand loss is an issue and I
understand what these tools how to
navigate them and then I when I hear
people saying something that is
contradictory to what they really want
which happens all the time then I'll say
something like wow you know somebody
says why can't get is listening because
my brother-in-law is a real estate agent
so it sounds to me like your
relationship with your brother knows
more importantly than sell a house
that's a hospital but that what that was
the label that was a Hopkins negotiation
skill so tell me if there's a difference
here in that situation a script in real
estate so a realtor would say in that so
what's more important to you your
relationship with your brother-in-law or
getting your home sold for the highest
price is that different than what you
just said in anyway the differences are
and they're to depend upon person's
brain I need to get through quicker with
a question or I get through quicker with
the tools that I just used which was a
label and so there are some people that
when asked questions because we're
hostage negotiators gather information
but I don't always gather information by
asking questions I want you to give me
an unguarded and an honest response you
are less likely to give me an unguarded
or honest response as a result of a
question even what question which is a
very good question the bread and butter
of your question should be what now
but some people immediately get their
back up and they become guarded with
questions so instead of saying you know
what's more important to sell in a house
or your relationship with your brother
mom I just observed the dynamic that's
taking place or what you're telling me
is well I would say no no he said he
sounds like I was like it sounds like
your relationship with your brother owns
more important sell announced well it
sounds like you're willing to leave
money on the table in order to preserve
your relations and so now we're getting
to know that's another way to get to to
no direct right yeah because then now
that was possibly know that I'm not
doing exactly and then they feel in
control and they feel protected and they
don't understand where the feeling of
control came from and the feeling of
protection came from but so consciously
they know it came from you so now when
you're the trust business they connect
feelings of being protected
with the sound of your voice reading
your name and seeing your face you said
each word has a different emotional
impact can you say more about that well
I am you I a self-centered you is a
provocation good or bad depend upon the
context I like the word I a lot but I'm
getting ready to be assertive and I'll
say I'm sorry and that'll be assertive
we use empathy so we can be assertive
and it's an empathic way I won't be
assertive and then apologize that was
that's bad time I would say we can't do
this I'm sorry I'll say I'm sorry we
can't do this I know the sequencing of
the emotional impacts so use I when I
need to be is usually used best when
you're saying no or setting about so
this is important we can't do this I'm
sorry versus I'm sorry we can't do that
right apologize first and that can
change the whole what you're saying is
that can change the whole dynamic right
of a negotiation just that right
switching or worse yeah absolutely
two reasons first of all we apologize
before they know where you're
apologizing for
think alike oh you're sorry which means
both got instant attention anytime that
you provoke someone into attention your
words automatically have more weight
also when you say I'm sorry first as
fast as in line works they run to the
entire damage they don't know what it's
going to be you know I'm sorry they
think you're going to say your home is
being foreclosed on the FBI has a
warrant for your arrest
and your children are in jail so in that
moment also knowing how the brain works
negatively then whatever I say after
that spy going to be relief I you know I
different different context the same
analogy I get a woman was working in a
business where she wants some time off
and they're short-handed and they've had
people quit she goes into the boss and
says I'm sorry gets a really bad news
for it he'll is even quit she said I
just need some extra time off oh god
yeah you got so I know how the
sequencing works so if you know how it
works why don't you why don't you use it
it's understanding how it works and then
change changes in the sequencing around
how do you balance tactical empathy with
them getting to know you
is there a contradiction there or is
that a competing no I want I want both
things to happen at the same time what I
want them to get to know from me is that
they could trust me and then I'm a
straight shooter and if I get bad news
I'm not going to hide it from them
because that just builds that much more
trust so how do you build trust what are
some of the things that enables you to
build trust with someone you're dealing
with okay right off the bat we do what's
called a cold read and we never say I
understand everything but we'll say all
right so if I met you for the first time
I'll say this is situation you find
yourself in this is what the real estate
market looks like today this is the
challenges that are being faced by
buyers and sellers here's what some of
the problems are here's the problems
that happen every single time if you
navigate these with a certain amount of
time this is how it's gonna go
and what's that done is it immediately
it showed that you know something about
the market and you probably say if your
first time I'm going to tell you what
you're thinking
I will do read of the situation of you
and I will tell you what it is initially
I wanted two things happen as I say wise
person really knows what they're talking
about well they go no no this is what it
is here's what you need to understand
which means you haven't hit when they
correct you you have an instant
collaboration going on then when you
listen now they feel this great sense of
trust and predictability as much as
anything else
I don't want surprises as a football
player and you know a little bit about
that right I was trained to read react
right and then close right and reading a
lot was about being prepared you know
how you know being able to size up a
situation quickly right and that meant I
had to study formations down and
distance tendencies all those things so
the moment I light up lined up in a
quick second you looking through I'm
reading fast through okay this is what I
think is going to happen right then the
play starts and then I've got to react
you know I have an assignment I've got
to do my assignment and if it has a
linebacker if the gap opens up I've got
to shoot the gap and make the play is it
is there a similar pattern that happens
in a negotiation yeah which I would say
is almost word-for-word I mean you take
what you've known you've read it you
make some predictions and then you're
prepared to adapt there is a colon power
phrase never let your ego get so tied to
a position that if the position
collapses your ego goes with it so when
you do a read you can't say it's going
to happen like this because when it
beers your ego is tied to that wanted to
go certain way what I was doing
kidnapping negotiation I got to the
point where I used to think all right
there's only about five different ways
this could possibly go whichever one it
is I'll go with it
I've seen now didn't it before you went
into a negotiation did you have that
talk with yourself you know this is what
I think can happen here I take a rough
read of the situation yeah and they're
there few situations you go into that
even if you've never seen it before you
can start making some pretty good
guesses and so I so somebody someone at
home are they going to be emotional yes
if it was my first day as a real estate
agent and it was the first person that I
ever spoke to I'd look at it I'd say
selling your home's got to be an
emotional process they won that's all I
know
so once you can start adding to your
read adding to your depth of experience
and then empathy is recognition and
articulation so you're going back and
you see in what you're rec what you're
recognizing then you're articulating it
that answer your question yes the how do
you how do you train yourself what I
hear with Realtors all the time they're
always trying to use logic they're
always trying to use facts and
convincing someone of their arguments
right rather than you talk about you
know trying to find out what the emotion
is underlying the situation right and
all this triggers back to your first
example how you do it it's really
awkward at first because everyone's got
these habits that they're so tied into
everyone in the room
they basically negotiate on autopilot
would you agree they do the same thing
you go back to your hand
over and over again yeah how do you
start to unwind these habits just lay up
here you know saying you know what I
think I hear you saying verses you seem
to say right just that little thing you
have to consciously think about using
the word you versus I how do you how do
you in all your training how do you get
people to start doing things differently
that feel awkward uncomfortable and a
lot of it seems very counterintuitive
right
right yeah yeah it is kind of intuitive
here you are you're going into a
negotiation this is how you get paid and
now you're going to do something that
feels awkward counterintuitive that's
that's a big leap yet yes or no it's a
big leap if you look at it all at once
okay so how do you break it down what do
you do to break it down you pick a skill
and on a day when you haven't got a lot
at stake which are so if you're not
negotiate with sellers or buyers on
Monday whatever on Monday all day long
no matter what happens I'm going to let
the other person talk first and I'm just
going to try to paraphrase everything I
hear it's a low stakes day what this
gets into is as a rule I call it the
rule 67 somewhere between one and sixty
seven tries you're going to get it and
if you try it and if you just spend the
day doing it you probably get 20 tries
in that day and so we'll pick different
negotiation skills and out and I'll say
I'll tell some today's paraphrased a
you're not allowed to do anything other
than paraphrase everybody you talk to
today all day long and do it in a
low-stakes day when you're not
negotiating a deal in your life by the
end of the day you're going to be like
wow that was a cool day I get stuff out
of people I never expected to get out of
them and that's how you get it just it
comes to you very quickly your thing
that you have to watch out for though is
it's a perishable skill it's like any
it's a skills not riding a bike so
requires a certain amount of maintenance
afterwards
you can't just acquire it and say well I
can label whenever I feel like it you
have to still be able to use juicy
skills in your everyday conversations so
that when you're talking to seller or
buyer then the recognition comes
so how many hostage negotiators are
there in the country you have any idea
yeah I got a rough idea and how many of
them and how many of them would
experience and what kind of experience
they're on any given point in time the
FBI's got about 400 NYPD has about 400
LAPD probably has there there's
negotiators and there's waters or duel
hats so there's a lot of them but since
there's so many of them not that many of
them actually get to do real-life
negotiation and is there real like do
they have to go through training or can
anyone just be a hostage negotiator yeah
every agency has their own training
their own training requirements the FBI
provides training to law enforcement for
free so the vast majority of hostage
negotiators in the u.s. have been
trained by the FBI and would you taught
a lot of classes now what have you learn
about people and their natural
tendencies towards negotiating versus
what you think would be more effective
you know there's a couple natural
tendencies are getting away if you're
control oriented that gets in your way
they're all control for it right away if
you're uncomfortable it will be
uncomfortable two or three people are
very uncomfortable with silence and they
can't keep quiet that's that's the
problem yet you have to be comfortable
with silence some people are scared to
learn you know they're afraid that it's
an admission of weakness or
vulnerability and they don't they don't
want to met that that say they need to
learn more stuff so you know those kind
of things getting our way you talked
about this addiction - yes which right
here in the room are you saying that
first you want to get to know in order
to then have the possibility to get to
yes or you
are you trying to get to a no in the
beginning the trend of point how clouded
the other person's flawed patterns are
like if I if I'm talking to somebody
that I can see like if somebody's not
listening at all then I'll get you to
say no a couple times because it'll
startle ya
and it'll it'll break you out of this
internal thought pattern and at that
point in time what I'm going to go for
after that is I'm gonna try to say a
couple things to you that you'd be
surprised in a really good way that I
noticed no I'll say it sounds to me like
this is really Wayne handling on your
mind sense of me like it looks to me
like you got a lot on your plate you
know I'll do a read of your body
language when I come up and the look on
your face to see if I get a feeling of
what you what mood you later I mean my
first first thing to you I might say
like long day is it beneficial when
you're going into a negotiation to think
about why the deal won't work oh I'll
look for why you think it won't work
okay is why you think it will work is
going to be the most important thing so
I'm going to be looking for reluctance
and hesitation like if for some reason
if you accidentally ask somebody a
question where you're trying to get them
to say yes and they go okay stop right
there there's that there's a hole to
dive down into is the other thing that
happens when someone gives you a
hesitation of the total voice at all is
they're hoping you pick up on it hoping
hoping hoping that you hear it
if you gloss over what you just taught
them was you're not listening
in the book you talk about your right
versus that's right tune this is a your
right kind of crowd you laughter a kiss
of death the essence of death absolute
somebody looks at you and says you're
right we say that when we're talking to
people that we want to maintain a
relationship with and we want them to
shut up and go away and and within my
company that we have a working joke that
when we say you're right you're really
saying after you to the other person and
I'm having a discussion giving my
Director of Operations a few months ago
and and he said hammer me on something
and finally and he was so passionate
about it finally I just said to him
you're right anyone okay because we but
you're right is really bad it's it's bad
it's what people say to you when they
want you to stop talking trash
[Applause]
[Music]